Hidden costs of off-campus living surprise students
Utilities, new furniture, room view add hundreds to monthly rent expenses
By Kelsey Matevish
Nov. 29, 2011
When they move off campus, many Penn students expect to simply pay for rent and utilities each month. However, some are surprised to find themselves paying for much more than they originally thought.
College sophomore Nebiyu Osman opted to live with some of his track and cross-country teammates this year, moving off campus into an eight-person house managed by a private landlord.
But when he moved in earlier this year, he found that his room was uninhabitable as the carpet was stained and covered in dirt.

“The carpet when I came in was totally disgusting,” he said. “It wasn’t even worth it trying to clean.”

Osman ultimately tore the carpet out of the room, only to find that the hardwood underneath the carpet was just as dirty.
“[The landlord] was supposed to clean the house before we moved in,” Osman said. “I didn’t think it would cost anything. I thought they would take care of handling it.”

Instead, Osman footed the $300 bill for putting new carpet into the house, much more than he expected. Two of Osman’s housemates faced similar problems.

While Osman’s problem is relatively uncommon and usually taken care of by landlords, many students who live off campus find themselves spending money on furnishing the house or apartment.

Osman’s roommate, Wharton and Engineering sophomore Max Lamb, had to spend about $500 to buy a wardrobe and other furniture.

Other students decide to live in already furnished apartments, hoping to avoid such costs.

College junior Florence Sit currently lives in the Radian, choosing to live there due to its proximity to classes as well as the facilities it offers.

However, even students who live in already furnished apartments or houses face some hidden fees. Though most costs are included in rent, the Radian currently charges inhabitants who live above the 10th floor a $25 per month “view fee.” There is also a $75 per month master bedroom fee for some rooms.
Sit found that while overall the “Radian is a little more expensive than I expected than on-campus dorms,” the ease of living so close to classes and convenience of having in-building facilities ultimately factored into her choice to live there.

Aside from aforementioned fees, Housing and Conference Services also recommends that students factor in the cost of housing insurance into their living estimates.
