Life off-campus: The security deposit
Students signing leases on off-campus housing risk losing a significant amount of money if they are careless with the property.
Off-campus realtors require future tenants to show good faith by paying security deposits -- the equivalent of one or two months of rent in advance.
Security deposits are returned at the close of the lease, with deductions for property damage beyond normal wear and tear.

The conditions for reclaiming the deposits are spelled out in the lease. Common conditions include not repainting the walls, staining the furniture or leaving appliances uncleaned.

However, some students face problems recovering their deposits.
"Unfortunately, students get a bad rap," Metropolitan Management Corporation property manager Andrea D'Angelo said.

"Some are very careless, or even their friends are," she added, citing carpet stains and holes in the wall as common reasons that students are denied part of their deposit.

State law requires that realtors return security deposits or an itemized list of damages -- not to exceed two months of rent -- within 30 days of the lease's end.

Landlords inspect property soon after tenants vacate.

Rodman Stewart, property manager for Urban and Bye Realtor, said that complaints about withholding security deposits are rare.

"We don't try to hold onto the money," he said.

When problems do arise, "the major thing is cleanliness. Students don't take the time to clean a stove or refrigerator properly."
Opinion varies among students as to how easy security deposits are to recover.
College senior Meredith Seidel has lived off campus and subletted an apartment for three summers, and has always gotten her security deposit back.

"I know people who have had parties, who had reason for their deposits to be taken away. It's always legitimate," Seidel said.

College sophomore Lily Snyder disagreed about the easiness of reclaiming deposits.

"You never get your security deposit back," she said.

She does not anticipate recovering her security deposit with Campus Apartments this year because she "left [her] hairdryer on and burned holes in the carpet."

Engineering senior Chris Osborn took a more moderate view. "I think it's handled fairly overall," he said, but noted that the cost of deposits is high.

The Office of Off-Campus Living recommends taking additional steps to safeguard security deposits, including documenting the initial condition and any maintenance problems.

College sophomore Jamie York said she plans to take photos of her apartment and "annoy my landlord with my maintenance problems."